[CGPXX]: Update blockGasLimit to 50M and targetDensity to 0.7 (#131)
celo-org/governance: CGPs/cgp-0053.md

---
cgp: <to be assigned>
title: Increase the gasLimit to 50M and gas targetDensity to 0.7
date-created: 2022-04-03
author: Mariano Cortesi (@mcortesi5), Javier Cortejoso (@jcortejoso), Gastón Ponti (@gastonponti)
status: DRAFT
discussions-to: <tbd>
governance-proposal-id: <tbd>
date-executed: <tbd>
---
## Overview

CGP - Celo Governance Proposal

> This proposal sets the block gas limit parameter of the Celo blockchain from `20M` to `50M` and the gasPriceMinimum's targetDensity to `0.8`. The change is motivated by the improvement on block processing throughput with the latest celo-blockchain releases.

Reviewer: i think typo here on ` gasPriceMinimum's targetDensity to 0.8` where it is 0.7

Reviewer 2: Yes, you are right!

The most relevant changes that positively impact the performance of the network are:

- [Snapshots](https://blog.ethereum.org/2021/03/03/geth-v1-10-0/)
- [CIP43: Block Context](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-proposals/blob/master/CIPs/cip-0043.md)

For confirming the safety and stability of a block gas limit of `50M`, cLabs Blockchain Team have run load and stability testing during the last weeks.

The change will increase the transaction throughput by way of the increasing the block space by 150%, and also will increase the effective network target block for adjusting the baseFee, that currently is `0.8 * blockSize` (`16M`) and will be `0.7 * blockSize` (`35M`).

## Proposed Changes

1. Increase the block gas limit parameter:

    - Destination: Call `setBlockGasLimit` on the `BlockchainParameters` smart contract owned by `Governance`
    - Data: 50 000 000 (50 Million)
    - Value: 0 (NA)

2. Decrease the gasPriceMinimum's target density:

    - Destination: Call `setTargetDensity` on the `GasPriceMinimum` smart contract owned by `Governance`

>     - Data: 700 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 (7e23 => 0.7)

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to have a bit of an explanation of this value, which would allow people to independently verify it. Its not clear why 7e23 would correspond to 0.7, so its difficult to check that its not off by a factor of 10/100/1000 ... etc

Author: Not a big expert for explaining the rationale about this format, but the value is used by `[setTargetDensity](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/master/packages/protocol/contracts/common/GasPriceMinimum.sol#L92)` call, that `[wraps](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/master/packages/protocol/contracts/common/FixidityLib.sol#L46)` the value as a `[Fraction](https://github.com/celo-org/celo-monorepo/blob/master/packages/protocol/contracts/common/FixidityLib.sol#L18)` struct:

```
  /**
   * @notice Wrap a uint256 that represents a 24-decimal fraction in a Fraction
   * struct.
   * @param x Number that already represents a 24-decimal fraction.
   * @return A Fraction struct with contents x.
   */
  function wrap(uint256 x) internal pure returns (Fraction memory) {
    return Fraction(x);
  }
  ```

![Block Processing Time](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5635989/167684677-a8758d16-9998-4c11-98a7-9cf5dabdef37.png)

The previous image represents how the block time (~5 seconds), split between the different steps of block construction and block consensus. The time spent in `consensus_istanbul_backend_sleep`, that represents idle time for the block time.

For a 50M block size, a full node running on n2-standard-4 (4vCPU and 16 GiB memory) can keep synced without problems:

![Full nodes block delta](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5635989/167696090-25f266ab-a4b1-48e9-82a5-dc7f95ffb4cf.png)

In the previous graph is represented the block delta between the network block head, and the latest block from each node. As show, none of the instances distanced more than one blocks from the head, and part of this can be caused by different timing with the metric probe (the spike shown in the graph was caused to a restart of the preemptible instance).

![Block Rate](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5635989/167696586-e0a0c964-8bff-49cc-a762-6cc9b8ae705f.png)

Lastly, this image shows the per-second average of new blocks.

> In the view of the results showing stability in all the observed metrics, we can reach the conclusion that the network can handle an increment on the gas block limit to 50M without notoriously impacting the average block time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the view of the results showing stability in all the observed metrics, we can reach the conclusion that the network can handle an increment on the gas block limit to 50M without negatively impacting the average block time.
```

> As a precaution measure, taking in count that the stress tests performed are not fully representative of all the possible usages of the network, we are also suggesting to change the gasPriceMinimum `target density` to `0.7`, to discourage long periods of stress on the network, making virtually impossible to fill more than 10 minutes of full blocks due to the high costs it would require.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As a precautionary measure, taking into account that the stress tests performed are not fully representative of all the possible usages of the network, we are also suggesting to change the gasPriceMinimum `target density` to `0.7`, to discourage long periods of stress on the network, making virtually impossible to fill more than 10 minutes of full blocks due to the high costs it would require.
```
